Zero-Shot Prompting: 
Prompt: 
Create a complete prompt engineering guide focused on Zero-Shot 
Prompting. The guide should include: 
A clear definition of zero-shot prompting. Three levels of examples: very 
simple, slightly advanced, and analytical.  A developer perspective section 
explaining when zero-shot works well and its limitations. A practical scenario 
example showing real-world application. Three practice exercises covering 
spam classification, translation, and blog title generation. Make the guide 
beginner-friendly, structured, and include expected outputs for each example. 
Format it in a clear, easy-to-follow manner with proper sections and 
explanations. 
Exercise 
1.Ask the model to classify sentiment (positive / negative / 
neutral). 
Prompt 
Classify the sentiment of the following text as "Positive", "Negative", or 
"Neutral": 
"I had a great experience with the service today. Everything was 
smooth and quick." 
Expected Output 
Positive 
Another Example 
Prompt 
Classify the sentiment as Positive / Negative / Neutral: 
"The product was okay. Nothing special, but not bad either." 
Expected Output 
Neutral 
2. Ask the model to summarize a paragraph without providing 
examples : 
As a Marketing Associate at ABC Corp, I was responsible for developing 
and executing digital marketing campaigns that increased website traffic 
by 25% over six months. I collaborated closely with cross-functional 
teams to create engaging content for social media channels, managed 
email marketing initiatives, and analyzed campaign performance using 
analytics tools to optimize strategies. Through proactive communication 
and attention to detail, I contributed to improving brand awareness and 
supporting overall sales growth, demonstrating both creativity and 
strategic thinking in a dynamic work environment. 
Prompt 
Summarize the following paragraph in 2–3 sentences: 
As a Marketing Associate at ABC Corp, I was responsible for developing 
and executing digital marketing campaigns that increased website traffic 
by 25% over six months. I collaborated closely with cross-functional 
teams to create engaging content for social media channels, managed 
email marketing initiatives, and analyzed campaign performance using 
analytics tools to optimize strategies. Through proactive communication 
and attention to detail, I contributed to improving brand awareness and 
supporting overall sales growth, demonstrating both creativity and 
strategic thinking in a dynamic work environment. 
Summary (Model Output) 
You led digital marketing campaigns that boosted website traffic by 25% 
in six months and collaborated with teams to create effective social 
media content. You also managed email marketing and used analytics 
tools to improve campaign performance. Your communication skills, 
creativity, and strategic thinking contributed to increased brand 
awareness and supported overall sales growth. 
3. Ask it to generate 5 blog titles about food. 
Here are 5 creative blog titles about food (zero-shot style): 
1. “10 Comfort Foods That Warm the Soul on Any Day” 
2. “The Ultimate Guide to Exploring Global Street Food” 
3. “Healthy Eating Made Simple: Delicious Meals for Busy People” 
4. “From Farm to Fork: How Fresh Ingredients Transform Flavor” 
5. “The Art of Home Cooking: Easy Recipes with Big Taste” 
Few-Shot Prompting: 
Prompt: 
Create a complete prompt engineering guide focused on Few-Shot Prompting. The 
guide should include.  A clear definition of few-shot prompting explaining that you 
provide examples, so the model learns the pattern. Three levels of examples: basic 
pattern learning (like pluralization), tone imitation (converting to polite tone), and 
structured data extraction (extracting name and age in JSON format). A developer 
perspective section explaining what few-shot improves (format consistency, data 
extraction, structured outputs, pattern mimicry), how it reduces hallucinations, and 
best use cases like resume parsing, API formatting, and intent classification. A 
practical scenario example showing how few-shot helps in HR automation for 
extracting candidate information from resumes. Three practice exercises: 
converting sentences to past tense, generating JSON outputs, and creating sarcastic 
tone content. Make the guide beginner-friendly, structured with clear examples 
showing input-output patterns, and include expected outputs. Format it in a clear, 
easy-to-follow manner with proper sections and explanations. 
1.Provide 3 examples of classifying customer intent (e.g., “refund request”, “product 
inquiry”, “technical issue”) and ask the model to classify a fourth message. 
Classify the customer’s message into one of these intents:  - Refund Request  - Product Inquiry  - Technical Issue  
Examples: 
Input: "I want to return my headphones and get my money back." 
Output: Refund Request  
Input: "Can you tell me if this phone is available in blue color?"  
Output: Product Inquiry  
Input: "My laptop keeps shutting down automatically. Please help.” 
Output: Technical Issue Now classify this message: 
Input: "I can't log into my account even after resetting my password." 
Output: 
2 .Show 2 examples of converting unstructured text into a JSON schema (e.g., name, 
email, issue type) and ask the model to generate a third JSON output. 
Extract the following fields from the text: 
{  
"name": "",  
"email": "",  
"issue_type": "" 
}  
Examples: 
Input: "Hi, this is Rohan Verma. My email is rohanv@gmail.com. I need help 
because my payment failed." 
Output: {"name": "Rohan Verma", "email": "rohanv@gmail.com", "issue_type": 
"payment issue"}  
Input: "Hello team, I’m Anusha R. You can reach me at anusha_r@mail.com. My 
problem is that the product I received is damaged. 
" Output: {"name": "Anusha R", "email": "anusha_r@mail.com", "issue_type": 
"damaged product"}  
Now generate the JSON for this:  
Input: "My name is Vikram Singh. Email: vikram.singh21@yahoo.com. I can’t track 
my order."  
Output: 
3 .Give 3 examples of log-line severity classification (“INFO”, “WARN”, “ERROR”) 
and ask the model to classify the next log entry in the same pattern. 
Classify each log line as one of: INFO, WARN, ERROR 
Examples: 
Input: "2026-02-20 10:15:22 - Connection established to database."  
Output: INFO  
Input: "2026-02-20 10:17:40 - Disk usage at 85%, approaching limit."  
Output: WARN 
Input: "2026-02-20 10:18:55 - NullPointerException occurred in PaymentService." 
Output: ERROR 
Now classify this log line in the same pattern:  
Input: "2026-02-20 10:21:11 - Retry attempt failed for message queue."  
Output: 
Instructional Prompting: 
Prompt: 
Create a complete prompt engineering guide focused on Instructional Prompting. Start 
with a clear definition explaining that instructional prompting involves giving clear step-by
step instructions and constraints to the model. Include three levels of examples starting 
with basic instruction like writing a 100-word paragraph about space exploration, then 
move to examples with constraints like writing a blog introduction with specific tone, 
audience, and word count requirements, and finally show structured output examples like 
explaining a topic in a specific numbered format with sections like definition, types, 
examples, and conclusion. Add a developer perspective section explaining that 
instructional prompting is powerful for content generation, controlled formatting, SEO 
writing, report generation, and automated documentation, and include a key tip about 
being explicit with tone, length, format, audience, and constraints. Provide a practical 
scenario example showing how instructional prompting helps in building a content 
automation tool that generates blog posts with SEO keywords, headings, and maintains 
brand tone. End with three practice exercises covering writing a product description with 3 
bullet points, generating a LinkedIn post in 120 words, and explaining cloud computing to a 
10-year-old. Make the guide beginner-friendly, structured with clear examples showing the 
prompts and expected behaviors, and format it in an easy-to-follow manner with proper 
sections and explanations. 
1.Ask the model to write a technical blog introduction in exactly 80 words. 
A technical blog serves as a space where developers, engineers, and tech 
enthusiasts can explore concepts, discover new tools, and understand real-world 
implementations. Whether discussing software architectures, cloud platforms, 
programming languages, or emerging technologies, a well-written introduction sets 
the stage for deeper learning. It provides clarity, context, and motivation, helping 
readers grasp why the topic matters. This introduction aims to engage readers and 
guide them into meaningful, practical, and thoughtfully structured technical 
content. 
2. Ask the model to generate API documentation for a POST endpoint with clear 
formatting and sections. 
Instructional Prompt Example: API Documentation Generation 
Prompt: 
“Generate API documentation for a POST endpoint. 
Use the following sections and formatting: 
1. Endpoint Overview – Describe the purpose of the endpoint. 
2. HTTP Method & URL – Mention the method (POST) – Provide a sample URL 
3. Request Headers – Use a table 
4. Request Body – Include JSON schema – Add a sample request body 
5. Response Structure – Provide success (201) and error (400/500) responses with JSON examples 
6. Validation Rules – List all required fields and constraints 
7. Example cURL Command – Provide a working example 
Follow clean formatting using Markdown.” 
Expected Model Output 
1. Endpoint Overview 
Creates a new user in the system by receiving basic profile information. 
2. HTTP Method & URL 
Method: POST 
URL: /api/v1/users 
3. Request Headers 
Header 
Value 
Description 
Content-Type application/json Indicates JSON request body 
Authorization Bearer token 
Required JWT token 
4. Request Body 
JSON Schema 
JSON 
{ 
"name": "string", 
"email": "string", 
"password": "string", 
"age": "number" 
} 
Show more lines 
Sample Request Body 
JSON 
{ 
"name": "Kushal", 
"email": "kushal@example.com", 
"password": "test1234", 
"age": 24 
} 
Show more lines 
5. Response Structure 
201 Created (Success) 
JSON 
{ 
"userId": "98ac21ff", 
"message": "User created successfully" 
} 
Show more lines 
400 Bad Request 
JSON 
{ 
"error": "Email already exists" 
} 
Show more lines 
500 Internal Server Error 
JSON 
{ 
"error": "Unexpected server error" 
} 
Show more lines 
6. Validation Rules 
• name: required, min 2 chars 
• email: required, valid email 
• password: required, min 8 chars 
• age: optional, must be ≥ 18 
7. Example cURL Command 
Shell 
curl -X POST "https://api.example.com/api/v1/users" \ -H "Content-Type: application/json" \ -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \ -d '{ 
"name": "Kushal", 
"email": "kushal@example.com", 
"password": "test1234", 
"age": 24 
}' 
3. Ask the model to create a release-notes summary in a professional tone with 4 
bullet points. 
Include exactly 4 bullet points describing: – new features – improvements – bug fixes – performance updates 
Keep the language concise and suitable for stakeholders.” 
Contextual Prompting: 
Prompt: 
I want you to create a detailed prompt engineering guide about Contextual 
Prompting. This guide should cover how assigning roles, defining audiences, or 
providing background context improves AI responses. The guide must include a 
clear definition of contextual prompting, three levels of examples showing role
based prompting with a fitness coach creating a beginner workout plan, audience
based prompting explaining cryptocurrency to a 60-year-old retiree, and a business 
scenario where a startup CTO presents AI-driven analytics to investors. Include a 
developer perspective section explaining how context improves tone alignment, 
domain accuracy, relevance, and persuasive quality, and mention its applications in 
AI tutors, customer service bots, role-playing simulations, and training systems. 
Add a practical scenario showing an EdTech platform where students select explain 
like I'm 12 and the AI adapts difficulty automatically. Include three practice 
exercises for acting as a lawyer explaining contracts, acting as a therapist giving 
stress advice, and acting as a marketing expert analyzing a product. Before you start 
creating this guide, please confirm that you understand these requirements by 
acknowledging the task and asking me any clarifying questions you might have 
about the structure, format, tone, length, or specific details you need to create the 
best possible guide. Do not generate the guide yet, just confirm your understanding 
and ask questions first 
Examples: 
1. Act as a lawyer explaining contracts to a client. 
2. Act as a therapist giving stress advice. 
3. Act as a marketing expert analyzing a product. 
Complex Prompting (Advanced / Multi-Constraint): 
Prompt 
You are an advanced AI system designed to handle multi-constraint 
tasks with precision and reasoning. When given a complex prompt, you 
must identify and satisfy every constraint simultaneously including role 
assignment, output format, word count limits, structural requirements, 
tone specifications, and analytical frameworks. If assigned a role such 
as financial analyst, business consultant, or technical expert, embody 
that perspective throughout your response. When multiple output 
requirements are specified such as bullet points, numbered lists, 
scores, or assessments, deliver each element exactly as requested. 
Apply analytical reasoning when evaluating data or scenarios, providing 
evidence-based conclusions. Prioritize clarity, conciseness, and data
driven insights. Structure your responses to match the exact format 
requested, whether it involves sections, subsections, or specific 
ordering. Always maintain professional tone unless otherwise specified. 
If word limits are given, respect them strictly. Reduce ambiguity by being 
specific and actionable in your recommendations or analysis. 
Examples: 
1. Ask the model to generate a 250-word project proposal that 
includes objectives, scope, timeline, and expected impact, 
written in a formal business tone.  
2. Ask the model to analyze AWS vs Azure cloud platforms and 
produce a structured comparison including advantages, 
disadvantages, pricing differences, and ideal use-cases, using 
bullets and keeping the output under 350 words.  
3. Ask the model to act as an AI cybersecurity analyst and 
evaluate a network vulnerability report, producing output 
sections for Severity Rating, Impact Summary, Attack Vector, 
and Recommended Fixes, keeping the response concise and 
technical. s